---
layout: post
title: Operating System - Final Review
tags: cs
---

*This is a very sketchy notes of mine to review before the final exam of CS5348 - Operating System Concepts*

## Concurrency
- [[Threads]]: 
	- Is a **sequence of instructions** that can be run independently of a parent process
	- Shared between threads: data, pid; not shared: registers, stack, thread id
	- [[pthread]]: declare, create (pass multiple arguments using `struct`), join
	- Sometimes more threads doesn't mean better, like in [[multi-threaded merge sort]]. Need to put a limit on when to create new threads.
- [[Lock (OS)]]: 
	- To protect [[Critical Section]]
	-  different implementation
		- Disable interrupts -> monopoly, false disables of other interrupts
		- software lock
		- spinning
		- hardware lock `TestAndSet(&var, new) -> old`
		- `FetchAndAdd`-> used for semaphores more?
- [[Semaphores]]: `sem_wait` and `sem_post` are implemented using the atomic hardware-based `testandset` instruction. They are the generalization of Locks
- Popular concurrency problems
	- [[Sleeping barber problem]]
	- [[Producer consumer problem]]
	- [[Readers-Writers problem]]
	- [[Roller Coaster Problem]]
- Concurrency Bugs: order the locks

## Files
Concepts:
- File: sequence of persistent bytes, can be read/written
	- Virtually, a contiguous sequence of logical addresses
	- Everything is a file: 
		- directories: contains a list of pointers to the children (either hard or soft links)
		- devices (including monitor, network interface, etc.): unified interface with Status, Command, and Data.
	- Each working instance of a file is maintained by a [[File descriptor]] (including inode pointer and offset within the file)
- Inode: metadata for files
- [[file links]]: 
	- Hard link is reflected by the inode number in the data block. 
	- Soft link: included in the file

File system structure:
- Superblock
- Inode bitmap
- Data bitmap
- Inodes
	- Always has at least 3 things: file type (`f` for regular, `d`irectory), data block address (`a`), reference count (`r`)
	- Reference count can help reflect the number of links to the file.
- Data blocks
	- in a directory file, each child saves the inode number. Always contains entries for `.` and `..`.

[[RAID]]: Virtualize the disks
- RAID-0: stripping -> no fault tolerance
- RAID-1: mirroring -> wasting half of the space
- RAID-4: [[parity bit]] in one disk -> bottle neck in random write
- RAID-5: rotating parity

Example problem:
- Block size = 4KB, Data region size = 4GB, Inode size = 256 bytes
- Inode contains only direct pointers to 10 blocks. Maximum file size?
	- 10 x block size = 40KB
- Inode contains 10 direct pointers and 1 indirect. Block numbers use 4 bytes each. Max file size?
	- block size x (10 + block size / 4) = 4K x (10 + 1K) = 4,235,264 bytes ~ 4MB
- Size of data bitmap?
	- data region / block size = 4G / 4K = 2^(30-10) = 2^20 = 1M (bits)
- num blocks for inode bitmaps
	- bit map size / block size = 2^20 / (2^12 * 8) = 2^5 = 32