---
layout: post
title: "I should be the first author"
---

"I should be the first author" -- This sentence is extremely hard to communicate to co-authors when I write a paper with them. This sentence means is a complex statement that (1) I do the most work in this project, (2) my contributions are the most important to the completion of this paper, (3) I am confident and probably not being humble (maybe only for this occasion, or I am always that self-entitled), and (4) you (the co-author) can either leave that position to me or enter a friendly debate that can subconciouslyl becomes an unfriendly conflict. The first two are the positive and productive way to think about it, while the last two is negatively self-concious.

BTW, the author ordering rule is sad. Text is linear, so authors needs to be lined in a linear order. Therefore there must be a single first author, even when multiple people contributed equally to the paper. In industry, a team generally has a manager, and multiple workers, each of whom has their own title. An team behind a paper usually does not have such titles. May be the difference is in how labor is divided. In industry, such a division is contracted, fully respected, and long-term. People are usually willing to stay in one duty and be good at it. On the other hand, in academia, although such a division still exists for practical reasons, they are expectedly ephemeral (because most researchers want to be well-rounded). In fact, reseachers can benefit from achievements showing that they are good at *all* things research-related (writing, coding, doing math, planning, etc.)