---
layout: post
title: Ho Chi Minh City!
tags: life
---

A list of why I feel like being alive again in HCMC:
- Everything is within my reach.
    - Food stores are at every step on your on on the strets
    - With my scooter, I am just 30 mins away from _any_ friend (modulo traffic jam). And my friends in HCMC are the best.
    - I can see the [art performances](https://quickom.net/event/pool-no-water-1886) by my friend.
    - I can go see the wood, the beach, the mountains, etc. virtually every weekend.
- Things are pleasantly cheap.
    - My breakfast today costs $0.6 and was served faster than a normal fast food restaurant in the states. 
        - And it is YUMMY.
    - Rent is less than $100/month.
    - I can comfortably live with food 3-dollar food ordered from Grab with free ship (for 2 months, just enough for my time here).
- In Dallas, I’m no one. Here, I'm someone.
    - Here I feel the abundance of love by friends, family, and acquaintances.
    - When I approach some random stranger here, they *care* about what I have to say.
- People are _very_ nice.
    - One day, I was stuck in a heavy rain without a raincoat. I stopped by scooter and stood by the sidewalk under a tree to not get wet. A Grab driver nearby saw me, stopped, ask me to come with a raincoat on his hand. He gave it to me, refused to tell me even his name. I cound't say anything rather than "why are you so nice?"
    - People in a wet market called me "con" like calling their son, showing me way to buy the thing I wanted to buy.
    - The guard where I stay always smile when talking, also calling me "con".
- I am close to what made me me.
    - I am with my family!
    - I can see [art events](https://www.facebook.com/events/1109742456996595) about the region where I grew up.
- (Not quite about the city, but about this vacation) No research deadlines to run after. No more late-night being stressful of whether I can finish a manuscript by 7am. Just normal lowkey machine learning research projects that benefit the local people here.

I am very grateful for this.