---
layout: post
title: Summer 2024
tags: life
---

<!-- Goal: to capture my journey back in Vietnam, and show the audience how great a summer in Vietnam can be -->

Had a chance to go back to Vietnam last summer. There's really no place like home, because home is where you can find the most amount of love. Furthermore, from my limited experience, my particular home country has the best collection of food and sights.

I went back because I don't have anything to do in the US during that time.

The whole two months went by like a breeze.
But I'm glad that I managed to do most of what I wanted to [before the summer]({%post_url 2024-05-25-spring-24%}).

The bucket list was:
* a lot of time chilling with my parents and sister
### a lot of ultimate with Fulbright Ultimate Club

I had precisely one practice with FUC. However, I was able to throw with many people outside FUC, that was much more fun (isn't that one of the purposes of playing a sport, which is to connect with people via it?). I played with my roommate at by [a lake](https://maps.app.goo.gl/1oZFVKCcWJmCT1Ti7) in Thanh My Loi, with anh Phuc on a beach in [Hon Tam Island](https://maps.app.goo.gl/YEjCcpBVAnTKseMK6) and [Nha Trang city center](https://maps.app.goo.gl/ozxTn8n3hJzdxzwm9), with my sister on another beach at [Son Dung](https://maps.app.goo.gl/fErzw2AxxB42KXyP7), and with my close friends group in [Nam Cat Tien National Park]({%post_url 2024-07-26-nam-cat-tien%}).

* a lot of time hanging out with my favorite people in Saigon (you know who you are!)
* working on an exciting Machine Learning project (and getting paid hehe)
* attending ACL, the world’s biggest NLP conference, in August, with my advisor!
* a lot of time thinking about the next steps for my dissertation + talking with the undergrad prof who inspired me about this current topic



## Food

- A lot of vegetarian food

## Places

- Ho Chi Minh City (60% of the time, for work and hangouts). Cool places I have explored:
  - The landmark park
  - VNG campus
  - The park in Thanh My Loi
  - Thiso Mall
  - Nga Tu Binh Phuoc
- Dong Nai
  - Nam Cat Tien National Park
- Khanh Hoa (30% of the time, to be a son to my parents)
  - Hon Tam
  - Alibu resort
  - Fairy Mountain

## People