<!-- Goal: (1) to tell the story of me going to a great mindfulness retreat. (2) to record the experience so that I can relive it again. -->

It is 9 PM in Lodi, CA. It is pretty cold outside -- around 10 Celcius. But it is very warm here, as I am in the house of a professor Sebastian, who I used to learn with at Fulbright, now teaching at U of Pacific. 

I just got back from a mindfulness retreat in Deer Park Monastery, Escondido, CA. The situation leading to the retreat was funny: I wanted to visit several people, but they are available at times that are one week away from each other. Therefore, I need to do something in California during the time between those two periods. At the same time, the Plum Village app on my phone got updated, and the Retreats section was shown up front. Therefore, I happened to see the [Holiday retreat](link), happening right during my available days, 2 hours to the south of LA. So I rushed to applied. I wanted to say in the dorm to avoid the cold weather on the mountain, but the slots have run out. Therefore, I signed up for the camping option, knowing that I have to (1) prepare tents and warm clothes, while (2) still needing to endure the cold anyway.

## The trip to Escondido

The journey from LA, where I was visiting friends and hanged out with Huyen, to Escondido, where Deer Park is, was long but satisfying. It started at 7:30 AM and ended at 3 PM. I first took a bus from UCLA campus, where I was staying for free thanks to Khang, to LA Union Station. LA that morning was super foggy and cold. I managed to get to Union Station at 9:30, 40 minutes before my Amtrak trip, after taking 2 buses.

The Amtrak train from LA to Oceanside was super pleasant. The seats were wide. The train has two floors and ran so smoothly, even smoother than the subway. The passengers were all nice, organized, and quiet. Amtrak is the brand name of the national railway of the US. The route I was going on is dubbed poetically as the Pacific Surfliner, because it passes through the coastal side of California.

INSERT image

I arrived at Oceanside Transit Center at 12pm. The monastery told me to arrive between 2-4 PM, and it is just a 30-min Uber from where I was, so I started a quest to explore the town a little. So I start looking for food with a heavy duffle bag on my back, a small tent, and a sleep bag that thay Hung lent me. I asked Perplexity AI for good local dishes, and fish tacos stood out. It led me to [Johny Manana](LINK). I had three fish tacos there -- they were 7/10. After that, having abundant time, I walked around. On the coastal road of this town, there is a famous house where the Top Gun movie was shot. I went there, was the posters of Brad Pitt and his air craft in the movie. The house is now used as a coffee shop, but still has a sign saying "Top Gun House". Right across the road is the Oceanside Pier. It is a 0.5-mile bridge extending into the Pacific Ocean. It felt extremely nice to walk on that bridge on that day. The wind was gentle and cool. On the pier, I was surrounded by the ocean around, where brave surfers are swimming and surfing in the cold water. I watched them then I suddenly was a sea gull emerging to the surface, which I didn't expect to see at such a place at all. I sent my friend photos of Oceanside, saying "I have found the best town in the US."

Still having too much time before 4pm, I decided not to take a Lyft just yet, but a local train called SPRINTER to explore a little more while also saving some money. It was a new train service, very clean and modern. It ran for about 45 minutes before brining me to Nordahl Road station -- the closest transit station to the monastery. I got off, called a Lyft for $18 to go to the monastery. The Lyft driver said she never heard of the monastery even though she grew up nearby. Obviously, she is not a Buddhist.

## Arrival

The monastery is located on the mountain of Escondido, overseeing the towns below it. It greeted me with a rock caligraphed with "I have arrived, I am home." I arrived at 3 PM when the volunteers led me to the camping ground. No so many people were there yet, so I have plenty of choices to place my tent. It is a small tent for 2 people, costing only $20 on Amazon. Strugging a bit to fix the tent on the rocky ground with the weak nails given along with the tent, I was finally done. It was the first tent I set up on my own. I put my phone on the tent after turning it off completely.

The afternoon and evening went by with registration, a short solo hike to a small temple nearby, eating meditation, and the orientation lecture. 
- Everyone in the retreat signs up to be in one of the **Dharma families**. There are those for healthcare workers, Black and Indigenous peole, LGBTQIA+, etc. I signed up to be in the group for young people from 18-35.
- **Eating meditation** means eating and only eating -- no talking, no day dreaming, just being aware of our breath, of the food on the plate, and of our popped up thoughts. In that first meal I met T*, an exchange student from the UK, and H* and A* -- a couple from Berkeley. All three of them have either went to a Plum Village monastery before, or done substantial meditation trips like Vipassana. 
- After the meal, I learned that everyone had to wash their dishes by themselves right after the meal. There were four basins of water, the first one of which is filled with dish washing soap. Dishes were first cleaned in the first basin, then rinsed in the subsequent ones. It was interesting to see hundreds of dishes being washed cleanly with just four basins of water. Washing dishes in 40 degree F make my hands very cold. I learned to stay with the freezing suffering for a minute.

<!-- The orientation lecture was honestly boring, where the lectures kept referring to "tricks" to be mindful in a mysterious way.  -->

The highlight of the night was the starry night sky on Escondido mountain. For the first time, I saw hundreds of visible stars on the sky. They glown up beautifully. When everyone had already gone to bed, I stood there in the dark and cold, looking up, staring that them with awe. A person walked by and got scared by my presence. A police car also came by, asking if I have called 911 because he received one but couldn't find the caller. I told him I had no idea.

To counter the 5 Celcius cold outdoors, I rented a blanket from the monastery. It was still pretty cold to get into the sleep, but I managed to do it anyway, feeling tender as the night passed by.

## Day 1

Day 1 was the first full day where I lived like a monastic. At 5:15 AM, it was freezing cold and I was deep in my sleep, but the big bell on a small hill nearby was already invited. This activity is named **Wake up peacefully**. I was too tired by traveling the day before, so I slept through it, missing the **Guided sitting & Sutra Reading** and the **QiGong & Stick Exercise**. It was not very monastic. I woke up just in time for breakfast, which was done collectively in silence and mindfulness. The fog was thick that morning.

At 8:15, after breakfast, I joined my Dharma family to do **Mindful Service**. The idea is to have everyone doing some work to (1) practice mindfulness when doing work and (2) keep the monastery clean and organized. There were about 10 of us, with one facilitator named Kaliq, who has been staying there for 2 months. We started by gathering in a circle, listening to the calm voice of Kaliq, and went around to introduce our name, why we came to the retreat, and our "internal weather". My internal weather was as foggy as the weather -- I couldn't see life and myself very clearly.

Our family is responsible for collecting trash and recycling. That is arguably the funnest job among all. Kaliq drove us on the back of his old truck around the monastery, picking up landfill trashs and recycling materials. About 6 of us were there on the truck, chilling in the breeze and getting to know each other.

At 9:45 AM, we started **Walking Meditation**. This is the favorite exercise of Thay -- Zen Master Thich Nhat Hanh (the founder of the Plum Village tradition, in which Deer Park Monastery is practicing). This activity aims to help us learn to appreciate the Mother Earth for giving us a home to live in, while at the same time be mindful of our body and mind. It involves walking mindfully, usually slowly, across the forest, in a big group (Sangha). I enjoyed this a lot because it has all the benefits of sitting meditation, while keeping my body moving and getting me some fresh air in the forest.

At 10:45 AM, there was a talk by Brother Phap Luu -- a very calm and cool monk. He emphasized three practices: being upright, being humble, and being capable of using loving speech.

On that day, we also did the first Dharma sharing -- a mindful discussion between members of a Dharma family. There, Hyland asked how to reconcile the need to plan in life and the need of being fully in the present moment as taught by Thay. There were no concrete answers in the sharing. However, I found the book "Answers from the Heart" by Thay, which contains his answr for the same question. The most important part of his answer says "It's best not to lose ourselves over uncertainty and fear over the future, but if we are truly established in the present moment, we can bring the future to the here and the now, and make plans."
